---
layout: narrative
title: Abstract
author:
editor: Sabina Pringle
source: Capstone project, MA in Digital Humanities, The Graduate Center - CUNY
---
  In an effort to extend educational opportunities to incarcerated people, bridge the digital divide between college-in-prison programs and institutions of higher learning on the outside, enrich the field of digital humanities with a diversity of perspectives and new points of view and explore how minimal computing methods can further these goals, this paper proposes to develop an undergraduate college-level course in digital humanities to be taught in prison. At present, no digital humanities is course is offered in any college-in-prison program in the U.S., partly because restrictions on the use of computers and the internet in prisons make courses that require these hard to teach. The proposed course will rely on minimal computing solutions to work under a wide range of prison constraints including hardware, software and connectivity. In view of the probability that some incarcerated students may not have all the technical skills they will need to take an undergraduate course in digital humanities, the proposed course includes a series of tutorials originally developed by the Graduate Center Digital Research Institute (GCDRI), which cover the basic technical skills students will need. The course will be delivered in a regular classroom equipped with seventeen laptops connected by a local area network. No internet connection is required. Students will use the laptops to engage in digital humanities praxis as they gain expertise in technical skills as well as tools and methods for humanities research. The dual purposes of this pedagogical initiative are to provide students with tools to engage in multidisciplinary humanities research and learn digital skills which will help them find employment upon release. The technical part of the course covers the command line, version control, HTML and CSS, Jekyll (Ruby) and Python. The ideas that went into developing this course are influenced and inspired by recent work in the field of minimal computing and aim to fulfill student needs at minimal cost, keeping in mind monetary cost, cost in labor, learning curve constraints and environmental impact. A case study and possible proposal to teach this course in the John Jay College of Criminal Justice Prison-to-College Pipeline program at Otisville Correctional Facility is included in chapter five.
