---
layout: narrative
title: 1. Introduction
author:
editor: Sabina Pringle
source: Capstone project, MA in Digital Humanities, The Graduate Center - CUNY
---

The United States has the highest incarceration rate in the world with around 2.2 million adults in prisons and jails and more than 4.5 million adults on probation or parole (Kaeble). In addition to these, 60,000 people under the age of 18 are being held in juvenile detention centers on any given day (American Civil Liberties Union). There are 5.6 times more black or brown people in prison than white people per 100,000 of the population (Carson). Native Americans, lesbians, gays, bisexuals, transgender and gender nonconforming individuals go to jail or prison two to four times more than heterosexual whites (Hartney). A University of Georgia study published in 2017 shows that at least 19 million adults, representing 8% of the overall U.S. population and 33% of the African American male population, have felony convictions; shockingly, only 3% of the total U.S. population but 15% of the African American male population have served time in prison (Shannon). All formerly incarcerated people face serious difficulties in finding employment when they are released, and the toll on low income black and brown communities has been devastating. Nicholas Turner, Director of the Vera Institute of Justice, observes that

> We have lost generations of young men and women, particularly young men of color, to long and brutal prison terms. Even when they return home, they remain lost, as deplorable prison conditions and treatment seriously impair their ability to live productive and healthy lives long after release[^1].

[^1]: Delaney et al., Reimagining Prison

Despite evidence that education programs in prison lower short-term recidivism by 43% and long-term recidivism by 29% (Davis), the passage of the Violent Crime Control Act and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 made all incarcerated students ineligible for financial aid. The criminal justice system thus keeps hundreds of thousands of people out of school. Privately funded prison education programs work hard to provide some students with college preparation courses and courses that lead to Certificates, Associate’s, and bachelor’s degrees. With so many people in jail and so few of them able to pursue an education, CUNY’s mission to serve “as a vehicle for the upward mobility of the disadvantaged in the City of New York” (“The CUNY Story”) must continue to extend to those behind bars.

In April 2020 The Institute for Justice and Opportunity at John Jay College (formerly the Prisoner Reentry Institute) released a 60-page report on CUNY’s commitment to students impacted by the criminal justice system. In his foreword to this report, Executive Vice Chancellor and University Provost José Luis Cruz recognizes the need “to embrace our mission of access and inclusion by seeking and serving broader prospective student populations, especially those whom we have sometimes overlooked in the past,”  acknowledging that “[o]ne our most overlooked populations is those students who have been incarcerated” (The Institute for Justice and Opportunity, “Report”).

The Prison-to-College Pipeline at the John Jay College of Criminal Justice has been fulfilling the duty of higher education to offer a second chance to incarcerated individuals with great success since 2011 and presents an inspirational model of how education can “tear down [the] walls [erected by the United States’ prejudiced and inequitable criminal legal system]” (The Institute for Justice and Opportunity, “Report”) and help restore lives. The idea that the introductory digital humanities course envisioned here could be developed for the Prison-to-College Pipeline program at Otisville Correctional Facility has been one of the guiding lights of this project, and a possible proposal is outlined in chapter five.

At present, most prison courses are book-based and most writing is done by hand. Most facilities are under-resourced and low-tech, and students are denied internet access. The scarcity of hard and soft infrastructure to support digital work in prison settings is an opportunity for innovation through developing software for digital humanities praxis within the parameters of minimal computing. As an added bonus, course materials developed in this way will be easily exportable to prisons and other low-tech environments in the U.S. and in other parts of the world.

With a firm belief that education is a real means to improve people’s lives, this paper explores how a digital humanities course can be taught in prison and why the humanities, and not just technical skills, will contribute to laying foundations for turning incarcerated peoples’ lives around and enriching the communities they return to after release.
