---
layout: narrative
title: 4. Prison constraints
author:
editor: Sabina Pringle
rights:
source: M.A. in Digital Humanities capstone project. The Graduate Center - CUNY. May 2020
toc:
- Technological Constraints
- Communication as a security threat
- Tech Monopolies
- The Digital-Analog Leap
- Internet
- Learning constraints
---

# Technological Constraints

One of the reasons why technology is almost completely absent from United States prisons is that most incarcerated people and their families cannot afford to buy prison-approved devices or pay independent contractors’ exorbitant software service fees. The two companies that control most of the prison tech market – Advanced Technologies Group (AGT) and Securas Technologies – have a huge monopoly with little oversight and engage in predatory financial practices which include giving kickbacks to correctional facilities. Prisons exploit incarcerated people by profiting from their unregulated labor, paying them such abusively low wages that the MP3 players and tablets the prisons offer for sale are totally out of reach.

The big excuse for correctional facilities and their service providers’ tight control over tech is that digital communication between incarcerated people and the outside world is a potentially huge security risk. It is true that social media’s record as a means to organize and subvert makes it a dangerous tool in populations that have little to lose. The internet, however, can be controlled just as easily – even more easily – than traditional ways in which incarcerated people communicate with family, associates and friends. China, North Korea, Cuba, Venezuela, and the EU’s GDPR are all examples of controlled access to the internet. Security is not the issue here. The issue is money as a tool to disenfranchise, disempower, segregate and oppress, and to consolidate power control. Another proven way to segregate and oppress is to withhold education. It is therefore not surprising that teaching digital skills in prison-based educational programs is a low-priority goal. The excuse is that while allowing incarcerated people to use computers for educational purposes would be good, computers carry an inherent security risk. This risk is exaggerated and can easily be minimized.

---

# Communication as a security threat

After someone has been arrested and booked, they may be allowed, after having had their cell phone and other prohibited items confiscated, the proverbial one phone call. After that, they are plunged into a disorienting period of excommunication in a series of holding cells usually without windows and an electric light that always stays on, no clock in view, and no way of knowing how much time has passed except by counting the peanut butter and jelly sandwiches that might be breakfast and the moldy baloney or cheese sandwich that could be lunch or dinner. What the detainee could do with a cell phone at this point - maybe arrange an escape on the way to court or tell associates to destroy evidence – is not immediately clear.

When the detainee has been put through the system and transferred from a court holding cell to a prison, communication with the outside world continues to be considered a security threat. There might be an ongoing investigation and an upcoming trial, in which case the incarcerated person could tamper with witnesses or direct others to conceal evidence, or, if the incarcerated person were engaged in organized crime, could continue to direct criminal activities from prison, or could provide information about the detention center facilities and staff which could be used to plan an escape, or arrange the entry of contraband. For security reasons visits to the incarcerated person are limited in frequency and by relationship, but because visits can be easily monitored, the security risk they pose is contained. A controlled number of phone calls can be similarly monitored, and correspondence by letter or email can be reviewed by prison staff.

While the prohibition of unregulated cell phones makes sense as a security measure against potential violation of prison rules (“Contraband”), digital content can be easily monitored, and hardware can easily be locked into specific limited use. If incarcerated people were given limited internet access the demand for contraband cell phones, which sell for up to $2000 apiece (Roth), would surely go down. Prisons, however, are pushing the other way. In a statement accompanying proposed legislation for deploying new security measures to block cell phone use, Federal Communications Commission Chairman Ajit Pai describes a gory catalog of crimes including hits and extorsion committed from prison with cell phones, stating that finding and removing cell phones is the most dangerous part of a correction officer’s job because “a prisoner will do almost anything to hide and keep a cellphone” (Lecher). Pai sweepingly assumes that all – or at least most - incarcerated people want cell phones in order to commit violent crimes. However, the demand for contraband cell phones may well be driven more by people’s need to be in touch with families and friends than by intentions to carry out criminal activity through the use of cell phones, or by their need to procure a source of income. Having a contraband cell phone in prison is a way to make money by allowing other incarcerated people to use it for a fee, charging much lower rates than prison-contracted phone companies. Authorized phone calls in jails and prisons cost up to fifty times more than on the outside (Wagner and Jones). The idea that communication with people on the outside poses a security threat is true only if the communication is unmonitored. If, however, digital services did not carry such prohibitive fees, incarcerated people could have a lot more controlled access to the communications systems than they do now, and prisons would have a lot less contraband.

---

# Tech Monopolies

State prisons have contracts with different telecommunications network providers such as Global Tel Link (GTL), which sells email service to incarcerated people. In 2015, GTL controlled 50% of the Inmate Calling Services $1.2 billion telecommunications industry (Wikipedia Contributors, “Global Tel Link”). In federal prisons incarcerated people can communicate with a limited number of pre-approved people by email using Corrlinks software provided by Advanced Technologies Group, L.L.C. (“Advanced Technologies Group”)[^1]  which “develops and supports software solutions that help state and federal correctional agencies operate more efficiently” and preposterously claims that it “help[s] offenders become more self-reliant and better prepared to re-integrate into society.” Not only does it make money off people who have no choice but to purchase its wares, but also has the condescending gall to advertise its products as something that will help make them better people. Corrlinks is part of the Keefe Group, which in turn is part of the conglomerate H.I.G. Capital, and is a for-profit company subcontracted by prisons which charges incarcerated people and their families the rates that “the agency” sets (Corrlinks). From commissary to money transfer to communications to withholdings of up to 80% of incarcerated people’s wages, prisons and jails make enough money directly from incarcerated people and their families to fund a significant share of their operations. Therefore, incarcerated people are actually paying the salaries of the corrections officers and prison administrators, many of whom without incarcerated people would be without jobs.

[^1]: According to Business insider, ATG was founded in February 3, 2000 and is headquartered in Red Bank, NJ (“Advanced Technologies Group,” Markets Insider). According to Bloomberg, ATG was founded in 1991 and is headquartered in Des Moines, IA (“Advanced Technology Group,” Bloomberg).

Another of the Keefe Group’s lucrative businesses whose margin of profit depends on having huge numbers of people behind bars is Access Securepak, an email provider for at least 18 state Departments of Corrections (DOC) in 2014 which, together with Keefe Commisary Network, reported net sales of more than $375 million in 2012 (Eldridge). In addition to electronics, Access Securepak sells food, clothing and personal hygiene products to incarcerated people in DOC facilities and county jails. The electronics available for purchase include televisions, radios, and headphones in clear plastic casings “to eliminate contraband” (“Catalog”).

Another company which makes a huge profit[^2] on prisons is JPay, a privately held corrections-related service provider holding contracts with state departments of correction, county jails and private federal prisons to provide email, money transfer, video visitation and parole and probation payments to approximately 1.5 million incarcerated people in 35 states. It was started by Ryan Shapiro in New York in 2002 and moved its headquarters to Miami in 2005. Ten years later JPay was bought by Securus Technologies, a prison communications firm that has been criticized for developing phone tracking technologies that can be used outside prisons and for charging very high rates for calls and pushing to mandate the removal of in-person meetings of incarcerated people with their families (Wagner and Jones). JPay was taken on by Senator Cory Booker in 2015 in a letter to the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau asking the agency to stop JPay’s predatory practices with prepaid debit cards (Lopez).

[^2]: While JPay CEO Errol Feldman’s salary is not listed as far as I can see, JPay reported a revenue of $70 million in 2015 (Cobb) and in 2017 a Securus/JPay investor presentation estimated the total market for money transfers in state prisons to be worth $99.2 million in corporate revenue (Raher).

The prices of JPay’s digital offerings are outrageous too; but given that it has complete monopoly over the prisons it serves JPay is able to charge incarcerated people pretty much what it likes.  In 2009, JPay created an MP3 player for incarcerated people called the JP3 player, which sells in commissary for $39.99 (“Buying a JP3 Player”). Given that the wage for prison jobs for incarcerated people is between 86 cents and $3.45 per day (Sawyer), the JP3 player is unaffordable for most. The JP3 has a built-in radio, but songs have to be bought separately and cost on average $1.19 each, more than the average incarcerated person earns in a day. Songs available in the music library are selected by JPay and approved or censored by prison officials according to some criteria they do not disclose.

In 2012, JPay launched a tablet, the JP4, designed for the corrections industry, which enables incarcerated people to read and draft emails, play games, and listen to music. In 2015 the JP4 was replaced with the JP5mini, with a 4.3-inch screen and 16GB of storage, for $79.99 and the JP5S, with a 7-inch screen and 32GB of storage, for $129.99 (Battacharya). These prices are insane. According to CNN Business News, there were 60,000 JP4s in use in 2015 when the JP5 was launched (Battacharya). This is only about 4% of the approximately 1.5 million people JPay served at that time. This is no wonder, given the price of the devices and how expensive they are to use on prison wages as well as on the wages of many of the families and friends of incarcerated people, who come largely from lower income groups.

The JP5 is not connected to the internet. Instead, it is run on the local JPay platform and equipped with a secure bootloader on an Android operating system so no other operating system can be installed (Battacharya). These devices can be used to send and receive emails (there is a time lapse for screening) for the price of a 40 cent “stamp” (Battacharya). Users can also listen to music and audiobooks (which they have to buy), play games (which they have to buy) and watch movies (which they have to rent or buy). According to JPay, users can also access educational materials and read the daily news, but this depends on whether the prison makes these available. The JPay website does not specify if these services come with a fee. The only free features the JP5 tablet seems to have are a calculator and a stopwatch, and one maze game (“Buy Media”).

Ryan Shapiro, the company's founder and CEO, stated that the company was “looking for products that an inmate would want to buy and a corrections facility would accept." He went on to explain, as if it were the most natural thing in the world, that Jpay "take[s] outside applications, redevelop[s] them for prisons specifically, and then deploy[s] them […] the prison doesn't pay for any of [their services]; it's the end user who pays" (Lieber). And, as the JP4 was being launched, Shapiro was quoted saying, “Think about education, think about games; it's endless where we could go. We think it's as big, if not bigger, than the money-transfer business" (Lieber).  In a 2014 CNBC article, Ryan Shapiro stated "Our goal is to become the nation's digital consumer app company for prisons" (Wikipedia Contributors, “JPay”).

Just because something works without an internet connection does absolutely not make it a minimal computing tool. Kolibri[^3] - an Application Programming Interface (“API”) which describes itself as “a collection of tools providing access to open-source learning resources ranging from literacy to chemical engineering” (Kolibri) caught my attention because it is a learning management system that works without the internet. It also caught the attention of JPay, which made KA Lite – the first instance of Kolibri - available to incarcerated people by installing it on JPay tablets “for free” in 2016 (“JPay proudly makes”). These tablets are used in classrooms in at least ten prisons in the U.S. through JPay Lantern, a partnership between JPay and Ashland University, a private Anabaptist University in Ohio, as part of an educational program self-described as “the largest digital education program in corrections” (JPay Lantern).


[^3]: Kolibri was developed by Learning Equality, a non-profit organization founded by two former Khan Academy interns and a group of students in 2013 with KA Lite, a platform for accessing Khan Academy offline with a $5 million dollar grant from Google. According to its website, KA Lite has been used in 200 countries and territories around the world and in numerous prisons in the U.S. (Learning Equality). It is not clear how much money Khan Academy is making from business with prisons, but it is worth noting that In 2018 Sal Khan's annual salary was $824,000 and COO Ginny Lee's salary was $700,000 (Wikipedia Contributors, “Khan Academy”).

I had no trouble downloading and installing the app and 10 GB of content in one hour in New York City in April, 2020 in the middle of the Covid-19 pandemic.[^4] I downloaded the Khan Academy “Arts and Humanities” and “Computing” resource collections and found that these contained only a small amount of extremely biased and dismally curated content. These are the resources thousands of incarcerated students are getting, funded through the scant resources allocated for educational purposes in the First Step Act. It is immeasurably important that we fund real college programs instead of allowing funding to go towards dubious learning systems like Kolibri.

[^4]: Kolibri installers, updates and content need to be downloaded once to a device with an internet connection but then they can be copied from that “seeded” device to other devices over an offline local network. Once Kolibri is installed on a computer, it is run from the command line and opens in a browser.  

In addition to communications and electronic devices for incarcerated people, JPay provides money transfer services  - it has a relationship with MoneyGram -, parole and probation payment services, a prepaid debit card for use upon release, and collects contributions for a charitable foundation founded by a former Texas warden to fund scholarships for children whose parents are incarcerated (Wikipedia Contributors, “JPay”). Given the prices JPay is charging, it is hard to see how people in prison would have much to donate.

JPay was fined $80,000 in 2012 for violating Pennsylvania’s Money Transmitter Act by failing to have the necessary state license since it began operating in the state in 2004 and as of 2014, had been fined a total of $408,500 across seven states for operating unlicensed businesses (Wagner). In 2015, following a lawsuit by Valerie Buford against the Indiana Department of Corrections over revocation of her incarcerated brother’s access to communications networks, the Electronic Frontier Foundation criticized JPay for attempting to abuse copyright laws by stating in its terms and conditions that it owned all the content transmitted through its systems, after which JPay amended its terms of use (Maass). JPay gives a large part of its profits back to prisons in kickbacks or “commissions.” (Wagner). Although many of its contracts explicitly ban lobbying, JPay has hired state lobbyists and spent a lot of money lobbying in Washington to maintain its hold over the prison technology market (Wagner).

As technology use in education programs in prison increases, companies like Securus will be quick to snap up all the contracts and sell mediocre applications as educational tools. Instead of bridging the digital divide, such opportunism will simply litter the gap with e-waste.

---

# The Digital-Analog Leap

Aware from first-hand experience of how incredibly important communication with family, friends and communities in the outside world is for those in prison, at least three formerly incarcerated people created Instagram-type apps which allow family and friends to send selfies and messages directly from their phones to the prisons, where these are printed out and delivered to incarcerated people as if they were mail. Pigeonly is one of these apps and it is revolutionizing communications between incarcerated people and their loved ones by allowing them to send photos and messages as well as to access cheaper online phone rates for a low monthly fee (Pigeonly). Another app recently created by a formerly incarcerated person is Flikshop, an Instagram-type app that produces printable postcards “for as low as 0.79 cents” (Flikshop). A third app called InmateAid lets subscribers sidestep long-distance rates by facilitating an online connection at local phone rates regardless of geographical location, for a monthly $8.95 fee, and has cut the calling costs for some families down from $750 a month to just $50 (Carville). “Many prisons welcome the new technology, viewing the start-ups as potential allies in the war against contraband [and are a] win-win for everybody,” says Tammy Moyer, the Lancaster County Prison in Pennsylvania Director of Administration (Carville).

---

# Internet

The extent to which at least some internet access is denied to most incarcerated people sets these apart from the general population and is an urgent concern. With visits from family, friends and advocates suspended during the Covid-19 pandemic, not having access to online communication has caused acute and unnecessary suffering, and a lack of information has contributed to the exponential spread of Coronavirus in prisons and jails. While communication between free people in wealthier nations around the world has moved online, communication in prison has stopped. Incarcerated people receive limited information about the virus itself, the only available sources being television, radio, prison authorities, corrections officers and some limited and expensive communication by phone. We can only imagine how, under these conditions, the emotional strain that we are experiencing at this time on the outside is magnified. This strain has factored into numerous violent protests and riots against unsanitary conditions and lack of protection against Coronavirus in prisons all over the world.[^5] The New York State Department of Corrections and Community took some measures to increase access to electronic communications for incarcerated people including five free stamps per week, two free secure messages per week via electronic tablet and two free 30-minute phone calls (“Suspensions”). However, because lockdowns tend to limit movement within prisons it is not clear how easily incarcerated people can use their stamps, message vouchers and calls. Clampdowns on communication in prisons are thus contributing to increasing levels of fear and stress in prison populations and making it difficult for advocates to know how bad things are on the inside.

[^5]: On March 22 in La Modelo prison in Bogota 23 people died in a riot that started as a protest against insanitary conditions and insufficient protection from Coronavirus infection in a prison complex (BBC). A recent Marshall Project report shows that Covid-19 in U.S. prisons is spreading so fast that it is probably already out of control (Park et al).

---  

# Learning constraints

Years ago, my first boyfriend was incarcerated for something foolish he had done in his teens. His case had crawled through the criminal justice system for about seven years, and when he was committed to prison, he was a happy, healthy young man with a job. When I went to visit him after only a week of confinement, however, I was struck by the change prison had wrought. His skin had lost its glow due to prison food, lack of fresh air and lack of exercise and he was haggard on account of lost sleep.  The most striking change, though, was a sort of flitting absence that had taken hold in his eye. As we talked he was strangely distracted, as if he were not altogether there. As weeks and months went by these changes become more pronounced, and I saw that his sense of connection to the world was slipping away.

A Prison Reform Trust report found that isolation from families and social networks, austere surroundings, loss of privacy, poor physical and hygienic conditions, aggression, bullying, fear, suspicion, the attitudes of unsympathetic and uninformed staff, lack of purposeful activity, loss of personal control, loss of power to act, loss of identity, pressure to escape or to take drugs, shame and stigmatization, uncertainty and concern about reentry all have severe negative effects on mental health (“Prisons can Seriously Damage your Mental Health”).  Under prison conditions, people shut down. Many turn to religion. Others seek solace in drugs. Prison is about as unconducive a learning environment as we can get.

Prison schedules and regimens put incarcerated students under a lot of stress, which is never a good thing for study. If students do not find classes engaging there is a good chance they will not learn much. Humanities courses are a good way to push back against the disassociation many imprisoned people experience when confined because they help us make connections between personal experience and other contexts, and because they push boundaries and unsettle accepted paradigms, thus engaging the mind. Learning to do humanities research through praxis with digital tools further helps people engage, even under duress, because it is fun. Fun is a proven pedagogical method to engage students. Building is empowering and building digital artifacts in collaboration with others will build student communities in the prison classroom.
