---
layout: narrative
title: 7. Maintainability and Sustainability
author:
editor: Sabina Pringle
source: M.A. in Digital Humanities capstone project. The Graduate Center - CUNY. May 2020
---

The DH in Prison course site is a static site. This makes the rate of decay of its pages substantially lower than that of dynamic or database-driven systems. The DH in Prison static site does not rely on external web-based extensions or plugins to generate its pages. This makes its pages extremely stable. To ensure future compatibility with web hosting services and other devices, the versions of Ruby and Jekyll that make the site run should be updated periodically, but if this is done once or twice a year everything should be fine.

The site architecture/code of DH in Prison depends on Ed., the Jekyll theme we built it with. Ed. is licensed under an MIT license which grants permission, free of charge, “to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so,” subject to the conditions that we license our copy of the software with the same MIT License, which we have done (MIT License). This license guarantees that we own our work and it cannot be taken away from us.

The Ed. Jekyll theme was built by Alex Gil within the Global Outlook Minimal Computing working group based at Columbia University and has remained stable and up to date since its release in 2016. Gil promises to keep us informed of updates to the theme (Ed., “documentation”). As a minimal edition, Ed aims to “reduce the size and complexity of the back and front end while flattening the learning curves for the user and the producer,” so it is relatively easy to build and modify, and its static pages require less bandwidth than most dynamic sites. While most websites are written in markup languages such as Extensible Markup Language (XML), Intro to DH uses kramdown syntax, a variation of Markdown syntax, which, as human readable plain text, requires a much lower learning curve than markup languages do. This makes content easy to update and change without requiring programming expertise. By using kramdown syntax we eliminate the need to have technical experts deploy and maintain our work, lowering costs and expanding access to producers and contributors.

We are hosting DH in Prison on Reclaim Hosting, an internet hosting service that provides educators, institutions and students domains and web hosting. I registered two domains for this project: dhinprison.com and dhinprison.org, which I own and control as project manager. These domains are transferable and really belong to the project itself, which I hope will grow into a community effort. The cost of web hosting for these two domains through Reclaim Hosting is $45 a year. This thesis paper and the Intro to DH course site are hosted on dhinprison.org. I registered the other domain, dhinprison.com, only so that nobody else (such as Securus Technologies, for example) can register it.
